If you go back to the early 1980s all
the way up to the global financial
crisis, if you had just blindly bought
the lowest quality credit that's out
there, proxied by high yield senior
secured loans, direct lending, you know,
you blend the index, you would have
ended up with only about a half a
percentage point of incremental
performance versus high quality bonds
over that entire period.
>> And the way it worked u was that you
made a lot of money, a lot of money, a
lot of money, a lot of money, then you
gave it all [laughter] back.
>> Yeah. You made a lot a lot a lot a lot.
Gave it all back. And we go back to the,
you know, late 80s when you had, you
know, that period, initial period of of
aggressive underwriting. You had the
savings and loan crisis of the early
90s. You had the LTCM or the Asian
financial crisis in the late 90s. Then
the internet bubble and the telecom
issues of the early 2000s. Then, of
course, the global financial crisis.
That was a more normal credit
environment. uh since the GFC just
blindly buying uh the lowest quality
credit on the board, whether it's
private credit or lower quality public
credit, you generated 7% a year more
than highquality bonds.
>> Wow.
>> And that explains a lot. Not
surprisingly, you've seen massive growth
in that area of the market.
[music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLods podcast. I'm Jill
Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy [music] Aloway.
>> Uh Tracy, you know, we've been doing
this podcast for 10 years.
>> I am I am aware a whole decade
>> and we've been doing episodes talk about
big picture things and things that have
changed and what's different now in 2025
versus 2015 when we started and some
things are the same, some things are
different, etc. But I think, and we've
mentioned this before, I think the one
thing that could not be more different
is the rates environment. we were right
in the middle of like the ZERP decade or
the ZERP era or maybe in 2015 maybe at
that point the Fed had tried to hike one
time already and then the market sort of
slapped it down and said oh no no no
more we're not ready for more rate hikes
etc. The rate environment could not be
more different than when we first
started this podcast.
>> I mean absolutely. Can I say one thing
about the anniversary?
>> Yeah.
>> So we started the podcast in November
2015.
>> Yeah. Uh, we were going to celebrate for
the month of November, but we're now in
December. So, are we going to make this
a two-month celebration?
>> Well, you know, we're having our 10 year
anniversary party in December. So, I
think it's allowed to just Yeah, it's
it's allowed to bleed the 10 years into
both months given that we're formally
celebrating in December. I think this is
how I'm rationalizing this framing for
this per conversation since yes, we're
no long we're technically no longer in
anniversary month. I guess it's our
party and we can celebrate as long as we
want.
>> We can do it however we want.
>> Um, but you're absolutely right about
the rates environment. Um, and you know,
you could see that if you go back and
look at some of the old podcast
episodes. The other thing that strikes
me looking back at the old podcast
episodes is how many of them were about
shadow banking.
>> Um, which of course nowadays we call
private credit. [laughter]
>> And that's another thing that's changed
enormously. So the private credit market
now basically rivals the public credit
market in terms of size and there's
obviously a lot of concern about what
that means the outlook. So lots of
differences
>> lots of differences. Uh yeah completely
dramatic and these days of course we're
in the mid of some setting aside the big
picture questions. There are also some
uh small picture questions is maybe how
you put it.
>> Immediate questions. Um, at the time
we're recording this, it looks like the
December meeting is basically a lock
that there's going to be a cut. But up
until recently, there was a lot of
market uncertainty.
>> If we recorded this two weeks ago, it
would have looked very different.
>> It would have looked very different. And
you know what happens after December,
highly uncertain on many dimensions. The
follow through for the rate cutting
cycle. There have been uh increases in
various credit concerns of various
sorts. We've had a few small blowups.
what uh but you know nothing that big
but like what Jamie Diamond called the
cockroaches we mentioned it on the show
that suddenly people are talking about
credit default swaps on certain
high-tech companies which is very
unusual but there's
>> that's a Star Wars meme I haven't heard
that word in a long time it is
>> but with the AI buildout and how much
that's getting financed by various forms
of credit uh suddenly people are talking
about the fact that big tech companies
are credits which we don't really think
about very much and so there are some
big picture things, but also some things
happening right here and right now that
warrant uh further further understanding
and further explanation from the people
who really understand the most.
>> Absolutely.
>> Well, I'm very excited to say we really
do have the perfect guest, someone who
we've had on the show before, but
someone we love speaking to. We are
going to be speaking with Dan Iverson.
He is the CIO over at PIMCO, which of
course everybody should know about. So
Dan, thank you so much for uh coming
back on the Outlaws podcast. Thanks for
having me and congratulations on the big
uh 10 year anniversary. It's a it's an
honor to be uh invited back uh during
this series of uh of podcasts. So, thank
you so much.
>> Yeah, very kind of you uh to say. Let's
start small picture. You know, we have
this um I think this this episode will
be out before the Fed meeting. It the
market is saying it's going to be a
lock. It's going to be uh they're
definitely going to cut rates. But
beyond that, when you look into 2026,
there's sort of two different questions.
There's the ongoing uncertainty about
who is going to be the next um Fed chair
and then there's just the the questions
about how much appetite this existing
committee has to continue a rate cutting
cycle. So I'd love to get you know what
are you thinking about for the 2026 and
what uh what we could be expecting.
>> Sure. So you know we do think uh the
Fed's likely to cut rates uh at the
upcoming meeting. Uh we also think that
this is a Fed that would like to get
rates a bit lower uh into 2026. Uh the
challenge of course is that we expect to
see a little bit of reaceleration in the
economy uh during the first half of the
year and we also expect inflation to
remain uh comfortably above the central
bank targets. So you know we believe
this Fed when they say they're going to
continue to focus on the data. We do
think the data is going to be a bit
confusing. Um the general view you know
today at PIMCO with you know significant
uncertainty um is that they probably do
get rates down another half a percent or
so next year uh which is close to what's
being you know priced into the market
today. But again um if you see
meaningful reaceleration uh in the
growth data uh and more importantly if
you see um even a modest uptick in
inflation uh this Fed you know even with
a new chair uh will likely you know be
willing to remain on hold and then I
think the other point uh and this came
up with you know one of your recent
guests is that uh there's the front-end
policy rate and then there's the
reaction out in longer maturities. Uh we
do think there's a chance if this Fed
cuts aggressively into strengthening
data um higher inflation, you may
actually get um a sell-off uh in the
long end of the curve. So uh that could
be a bit self-defeating and I think uh
something that will be a topic into next
year if we do get that reaceleration
that we expect. There's a lot you said
there that I want to follow up on just
in that one answer, but just very
quickly, what is the the idea or the
gist behind why you expect that Q1
reaceleration?
>> Yeah. Uh, a lot of it's, you know,
related to uh significant momentum, you
know, in terms of capital investment,
you know, associated with AI as well as
the delayed positive growth impact of uh
the so-called big beautiful bill. um a
lot of the corporate um tax extensions
happen retroactively uh for the consumer
or the household. Uh in many instances,
you're going to begin to see, you know,
the direct impact in terms of positive,
you know, refunds uh coming into the new
year. Uh so again, you know, plenty of
uncertainty, you know, a lot of
crossurrens in this economy, but we do
think there's the chance that you'll get
some, you know, moderate reaceleration
in the first half of the year. you know,
we're looking at a growth environment,
you know, for next year in the United
States at least somewhere in the one and
a half to 2% type range. Um so again, um
that that's an environment where from a
traditional tailor rule perspective, uh
we don't think that the Fed needs to cut
a lot more from here. Although, you
know, we do think that this Fed,
particularly with new membership and a
new chair, would like to get rates
lower. since you mentioned the new
chair, um this is more of a a long-term
thoughtful question, but um obviously
for the majority of your career as a
bond manager, I don't think Fed
independence has really been um much of
a concern, right? We certainly haven't
seen the degree of headlines that we are
seeing lately with um Kevin Hasset
emerging as the front runner for the new
Fed chair position. How do you as a bond
manager view that particular issue and
do you have to start handicapping the
way you invest because of this?
I think to a degree, you know, I I think
if you go back several decades, you
know, you can question the concept of
Fed independence a little bit. And I
think even from the perspective of, you
know, this Fed's expanded mandate in
recent years, what the markets really
focused on is independence related to
the setting of policy rates, uh, which,
you know, of course have a direct impact
on markets. So from that perspective,
um, we are monitoring the situation like
other investors. you know, we do think
uh less independent Fed has implications
particularly in longer maturities uh
where you may need a bit more risk
premium uh when you're dealing with uh
uncertainty around you know Fed
independence but generally speaking when
we think about you know who's being
considered uh for the Fed role uh
including Kevin Hassert you know we we
do think that there'll be a general
spirit of independence there we still
think you know the chair is uh one vote
so to speak and we have a committee that
will continue to focus on the dual
mandate. So yes, it's it's it's a
consideration. Um it's an input into our
decisions. It's not a major concern. Um
we do think that, you know, the group
that's being considered are, you know,
certainly highqualified or highly
qualified and um will likely, you know,
continue to take, you know, a
sufficiently independent view, you know,
regarding monetary policy.
>> Let me ask you kind of the same
question, but with a slightly different
framing. Um it's December 2025 right
now. So we've had like you know over
four years now I think over four years
now of the Fed missing on its inflation
on the two on getting inflation durably
back to 2%. And if the Fed is going to
continue cutting as it looks like it's
going to do in December that signals a
further willingness to ease policy even
with inflation over its ostensible
target. Setting aside the strict
question of independence, do you think
the Fed regardless even the current
composition and the likely composition
going to be forward is just not going to
take 2% seriously as perhaps it might
have in the past?
>> Yes, that's a great question. Uh and and
I think that um in a general sense uh
the 2% target matters uh but not so much
the current inflation rate. Um, you're
absolutely right. We've been operating,
you know, and and living with an
inflation rate meaningfully above their
target for quite some time. But when you
look at inflationary expectations, and I
think when you talk to central bankers,
you know, here in the United States as
well as outside um um this country, uh
the inflationary expectations piece is
what's critically important. So when you
look at longerterm break even inflation
rates, they've continued to be very very
well behaved. uh you saw a bit of an
uptick, you know, you know, at the
outbreak of the war in Ukraine and then
you saw an uptick around the tariff
announcements earlier this year, but
when you look at a 10-year tip break
even rate, just to use one of of several
proxies, no no no one measures perfect,
you know, you're down around two and a
quarter% on CPI inflation. So to the
extent that inflationary expectations
remain well contained, we do think that
the central bank's willing to look
through uh some of the more um higher
frequency data. Um to the extent that
you see those longer term expectations
become unanchored, we do think that's a
risk uh for a Fed that's, you know, too
aggressive in in cutting rates here. We
do think that the mindset will change.
Not only the mindset of the Fed, but we
think the market reaction uh could uh be
counterproductive. not only in terms of
higher long-term interest rates, but an
impact on risk assets as well. So, you
know, the markets have let the Fed get
away with running fairly accommodated
policy, cutting into a 3% type inflation
world because again, there are a lot of
other forces uh at work that very well
could be disinflationary over the long
term. And there still is significant
confidence in global central banks and
being able to generally keep inflation,
you know, close to the target um on a
longer term basis. So, you know, again,
so far so good, but you know, this is
all going to be a key source of
uncertainty, you know, into 26 and
beyond.
>> I feel like uncertainty is constantly
the key word on our podcast nowadays.
Um, since longerdated expectations and
yields keeps coming up in this
conversation, I got to ask, do you
believe in the term premium or rather is
the term premium a useful concept to you
as a big bond investor?
>> It is. and and you know when we look at
you know where we're going to invest you
know we like to get paid for you know
taking more risk. Um we do you know see
an elevated term premium certainly
relative to where we were five or 10
years ago. Um and that's made longer uh
maturity investments a bit more
attractive. With that said uh there's
lots of reasons why the term premium
should be higher. Uh inflation is one of
them. Global debt levels, US debt and
deficit levels uh are another. uh and we
probably live in a world today uh given
what's going on in terms of you know
focusing on you know you know tariffs
and and and bringing back supply chains
you know to domestic markets uh the need
for you know higher risk premiums. So,
you know, as a firm today, we we we like
longer maturity bonds more, but we're
still, you know, tend to keep our
positions concentrated in shorter
maturities, and we would expect over the
next few years a little bit of
additional underperformance uh in uh the
very very long end uh of the yield
curve. So, we do think it's important.
It's interesting. People focus a lot on,
you know, the deficit situation in the
United States. As an investor, you know,
you don't want um to lend to a perfect
highquality credit. You know, you don't
get paid. so much to do so. So in some
sense we want you know just enough
fiscal irresponsibility where we and our
you know end investors get paid more to
lend uh but not so much where it becomes
a concern in terms of the overall
viability of of the system. So we think
we're in the midst of that type of
market environment today but things can
go a bit too far if we don't get you
know the deficit or the inflation
situation under control over the next
you know couple to few years.
>> Can you talk about the role of bonds in
a portfolio? Again, this is something
that in 2015
bonds fit beautifully into a diversified
portfolio because they were paying
something but also they had that nice
inverse correlation and so you got that
natural hedge etc. Um we haven't had
that very like that beautiful inverse
correlation between risk assets and
bonds for a long time which undermines
one of the cases for the diversified
investor of having like a big slug of
perhaps longer duration assets. How do
you think in 2025, how do you sell the
case that diversified investors should
still keep some allocation to duration
or fixed income?
>> Yeah. So, you know, it's interesting. I
I I know this is a 10-y year anniversary
show. So, you know, went back and looked
at the performance of of bonds versus
other things, you know, over the last 10
years, and the divergence in performance
over the last decade has been
remarkable, and it explains a lot. Um if
if you look at the S&P 500 over the last
10 years, um in absolute terms, you
generated a return of about 15% a year
adjusted for inflation, I think it's up
close to, you know, 12% or so. You know,
I'm rounding a little bit. When you look
at the performance of, you know, the the
Bloomberg aggregate index over that
10-year period, the return annually has
been below 2% in absolute terms. Uh when
you subtract inflation, you ended up
with negative returns uh in bonds for 10
years. So, not only has the correlation
broken down, but you didn't make any
money uh in owning bonds. When you look
at the starting valuations today under
any type of reasonable longerterm
valuation framework, none of which have
to mean revert quickly. But, you know,
you look at a, you know, Schiller, you
know, PE type arrangement or an equity
risk premium type argument, you don't
need a great correlation on bonds versus
equities. Um what the relative
valuations would suggest is that there's
a good chance that bonds outperform
stocks over the next five or 10 years or
at least have returns on a riskadjusted
basis very very close to stocks. So you
don't have to rest on a correlation
argument. You know you don't have to
focus on well bonds do well during you
know you know periods where you know
people are losing their jobs or you know
income growth is negative. you could
just from a pure valuation perspective
find uh the asset class quite attractive
absolute and relative. I think the
second point around correlations is that
correlations between stocks and bonds
will tend to break down when inflation's
the primary risk factor today. Yes,
inflation's above central bank targets
but there's a lot of uncertainty you
know on the economic side. You do have
this, you know, complex economy where,
you know, tremendous value, you know,
within the tech sector, tremendous
capital and investment yet lower income.
Um, households are feeling considerable
pain if AI is very very successful at
increasing productivity. That can mean
significant job loss across key segments
of the economy. So, the bottom line is
that risks are more balanced. We don't
think correlations are going to ever
come back to the really really neat
clean levels, you know, a decade or so
ago when inflation simply wasn't a
problem at all, you know, across the
global economy. But we have seen
correlations improve a bit and we would
expect on a go forward basis
correlations uh to improve further. I
think it's important again to look at a
global opportunity set. You know, I
think that the correlation arguments are
stronger in areas of the world that have
the best fiscal position. uh but in
general you know not only do we think
that the valuations are quite attractive
you know we do think the correlations
will be a bit better certainly than we
experienced coming out of the the co
period.
>> So Tracy 2015 bonds were an easy sell it
turns out they weren't the best
investment 2025 maybe a harder cell but
the math says that now is actually now
is actually the time to to expand your
exposure. Well, I guess in 10 years when
we do the 20 year anniversary, we'll be
able to to judge. But, um, Dan,
>> you know, since we're talking about why
people should buy bonds, one of the
surprising things that happened this
year was we had the big tariff drama and
we saw markets go down. We saw a bond
yield spike. Everyone was talking about
the sell America trade. So, this idea
that you didn't want to hold on to US
assets because of all that policy
uncertainty.
And now, you know, in December 2025,
yields have come down quite a lot,
although I have to say the dollar is
still fairly weak. You were always kind
of resistant to the sell America idea
and you pushed back on it. What did you
see that perhaps others didn't?
Well, again, I I think a lot has to do
with starting valuations. Um, after a
significant period of underperformance
across um, US fixed income or global
fixed income, you ended up with a decent
valuation cushion. Um, so I think that's
always important in markets. Um, yes,
there was news that in a narrow sense
was negative uh for bonds and negative
for US bonds or US assets in particular.
You started with a decent yield cushion.
you know, we began the year, you know,
with yields, uh, I'll call, you know,
10-year treasuries, you know, up near
5%. A 5% yield even in a 3% inflation
world's not that bad. I think the second
point though, you you know, we weren't
um overly convicted in just owning the
United States. And I think if I could,
you know, you probably the most
important thing I can say today is that
global bond investing is back. Uh, for
so many years, capital's poured into the
US markets. it's poured into the US
markets focusing on private credit you
know which has grown you know the most
here in this country but very very
quietly you've seen underperformance
across the global fixed income
opportunity set where today um even you
know from a US dollar based investors
perspective there's great yield great
sources of diversification so it's not
that we were you know insistent on just
owning US assets in fact we've gradually
diversified into other areas of the
market. We just thought that there was
good value and good yield in the US, a
sufficient cushion, and then by
extending into these other markets, a a
great way to generate incremental return
by good old-fashioned relative value
trading in markets today that are less
correlated than they were during those
years coming out of the, you know,
global financial crisis and where you
just have a really, really exciting time
to troll, you know, you you do old
fashioned trading across yield curves,
across markets, um, and avoid having
>> what changed because that seemed like,
you know, it felt like international
investing across any asset class was
like a real suckers thing. It's like,
oh, this is going to be the year that
we're going to diversify
internationally. You didn't get paid at
all for it. What is the what what switch
flipped such that actually both stocks
too because international equity markets
have done very well and have
outperformed the US, which is kind of
surprising in many respects, but what
switched such that now there's been real
opportunities to make money looking
abroad?
>> Yeah. Well, again, valuations have
improved. You know, we we talked about,
you know, the the real poor performance
of the US bond market over the last
decade. Um, as we as we all know, uh,
yields uh, were outright negative in
many areas of the world. So, we talk
about low yields, you subtract that low
inflation rate, you end up with a
negative number and big portions of the
global fixed income opportunity set. You
didn't have to subtract anything. Uh,
yet you started with a negative number.
So a lot of this has just been the
repricing of markets that started not
only at low levels but negative yield
levels. Then the second piece relates to
policy. Um coming out of the global
financial crisis, not only were yields
low but you had such incredible policy
activism where on any signs of economic
weakness, you had a massive fiscal
response, a massive monetary policy
response. Uh COVID, you know, the
ultimate uh example of that. And today,
you know, with debt levels and deficit
levels where they are, policy makers
don't have that flexibility. So, you're
you're back to an environment where
markets increasingly have to stand on
their own uh stand on their own based on
fundamentals. And that's just an
exciting time. Uh it means more risk
premia in markets, more term premium,
higher yields um with significant
valuation cushion absolute and in
relative to what looked to be, you know,
quite expensive equity markets. and then
just less correlation. Um you have
situations even over the course of the
last couple of months where a political
surprise in Japan or France creates lots
of local volatility in those markets.
Uncertainty in French politics impacts
UK politics because they have similar
challenges in terms of getting their you
know deficit situation uh in in you know
under control and in in economic
productivity higher. So it reminds us a
lot more like the mid9s, you know, back
before you had this massive volatility
suffocation from policy makers. And
again, with deficits where they are,
with inflation where where where it is
today versus central bank targets, it's
likely that over the next several years,
you know, you're going to continue to be
in this type of environment. Uh good
value, good relative value, and then
much less correlated markets, which, you
know, lead to, you know, some some good
opportunity to generate uh incremental
return above starting yield levels. M uh
well, we wanted to talk about private
credit as well because as we said in the
intro, this is one thing that has
changed quite a lot since 2015. People
obviously have different
characterizations of private credit, but
I'm curious how you think about that
space and how you would define, you
know, or how you would measure things
like transparency and opakeness and
customization in the credit waterfall
and things like that because again, uh,
one person's extremely transparent
market can be another person's opaque
morass of potential defaults.
>> Not much of this is new. Um you you know
when I joined PIMCO back in the late
1990s uh I spent the good portion of my
initial time at the firm focusing on the
underwriting of private assets. You know
we call them pure privates but these
were you know 4 A2 privates that were
created as part of the securities act of
uh 144A privates which were quite
popular. Um I I think the first one was
issued back in 1990. the technology
that's being utilized to fund uh AI
infrastructure today. Some of these
off-balance sheet contingent or makehold
guarantee type frameworks were around in
the mid to late 1990s. Um the difference
today is that you have this massive
capital investment need. Um so the deals
are larger. Um but a lot of the
technology has just been you know dusted
off so to speak for for the new era. I
think the other point that's important
and and when we're talking about
historical returns, you know, I think
this explains a lot is that what's been
so unique in terms of credit asset
performance in general has been the post
global financial crisis period where we
haven't had a sustained period of
economic weakness. Uh in fact, one of
one of my favorite, you know, data
series is looking at how lower quality
lending performed since way back during
the Michael Milin days, you know, when
he helped to create that market. If you
go back to the early 1980s all the way
up to the global financial crisis, if
you had just blindly bought the lowest
quality credit that's out there, proxied
by high yield, senior secured loans,
direct lending, you know, you know,
blend the index, you would have ended up
with only about a half a percentage
point of incremental performance versus
highquality bonds over that entire
period. And the way it worked um was
that you made a lot of money, a lot of
money, a lot of money, a lot of money,
then you gave it all back. Then you made
a lot a lot a lot a lot gave it all
back. And we'd go back to the, you know,
late 80s when you had, you know, that
period, initial period of of aggressive
underwriting. You had the savings and
loan crisis of the early 90s. You had
the LTCM or the Asian financial crisis
in the late 90s. Then the internet
bubble and the telecom issues of the
early 2000s. Then of course the global
financial crisis. That was a more normal
credit environment uh since the GFC just
blindly buying uh the lowest quality
credit on the board. whether it's
private credit or lower quality public
credit, you generated 7% a year more
than highquality bonds. And that
explains a lot. Not surprisingly, you've
seen massive growth in that area of the
market. Now, you know, weaker credit
tends to perform well when stocks go up
15% a year. Um, but again, you know,
that's where we are today. I hear all
the discussion about, god, you know,
underwriting is worse on the public side
versus the private side. The reality is
when you've grown this much, when you've
lent so much money to weaker quality
borrowers, when covenants have weakened,
when spreads are tight, when equities
have gone up consistently as much as
they have, you're going to have
challenges uh in these markets. So, when
we think about credit, um we look at it
under sort of two continuums. One,
liquidity. Certain assets are completely
illquid. The only decision you got to
make is the purchase decision. So you
better be right. Uh and then at the
other end of the extreme, you have very
very liquid assets where you can change
your mind on a regular basis. Um and
then you have economic sensitivity. You
have assets that are very insensitive to
the economy that are very very high
quality. Then at the other extreme you
have assets with a tremendous amount of
economic sensitivity, a tremendous
amount of sensitivity to AI related
disruption, um other forms of economic
weakness, um unanticipated competition,
and you just want to make sure you get
paid enough. And with stocks near
all-time highs, with spreads tight, with
covenants weak, they're going to be
problems. And I think as an investor,
you just need to acknowledge that you're
not getting paid what you got to take
that risk five or 10 years ago. Uh, and
you just want to be defensive. You want
to be skeptical. Um, but it's not so
much private versus public. I think it's
just thoughtful underwriting and just
understanding that we're at a time where
given the strong historical performance,
given the fact that we haven't had a
sustained period of economic slowing for
a long time, some complacency has worked
their way into these higher risk areas
of of of the market.
Well, talk a little bit more about
competition in private credit because I
imagine it's good to be PIMCO when it
comes to sourcing uh deals and maybe
negotiating the terms, but does even
someone like you, a a truly big bond
manager, have to deal with competitive
pressures where if you don't agree to
one bond term, someone else will swoop
in and agree to it and and take it away
from you.
>> Absolutely. And and and again I think
the other point about public and private
markets is that they're well integrated.
Um you know we could talk about
convergence you know a bit bit later
have have some views there but you know
when an issuer looks at um their options
they're going to test the public um
option they'll test the private option
and there is a lot of competition uh a
lot of competition for market share.
when you look at a lot of the managers
particularly in the private credit space
uh they announce very very aggressive
growth assumptions um you know as an
investor sometimes you know I I wish in
certain quarters people would talk about
you know if we can find value for the
end investor we'll grow this much all
too often you know after a pretty
bullish environment for for credit it's
we're simply going to grow a lot um so
you know we do see time and time again
situations where you start the
underwriting process you get down to the
point where it's time to get into a
final round and you don't get the terms
that we feel we need as extenders of
credit in this marketplace. And that's
just again symptomatic of the fact that
there's a lot of demand for these assets
and u there's a lot of demand relative
to the supply across many segments of
the market. And that's true not only of
uh below investment grade risk, but it's
very very true of certain transactions
um with an investment grade rating at
least from a from a rating agency. So,
you know, given tight spreads, given um
the competition, you just have to say
no. And I I'll I'll go back to the you
know, my my earlier point. Uh what's so
exciting about this market today is that
you do not need to take on aggressively
underwritten credit to generate return.
the high quality area of the market,
especially if you expand glo globally,
if you take advantage of liquidity,
which typically means flexibility for
end investors, you can have a high
quality portfolio where you don't have
to sacrifice return. Very different than
where we were 10 years ago. Um, but
again, pretty exciting now. Um, where
you can go up in quality without again
giving up return and in some cases,
ironically, you know, picking up uh
expected return. I want to go back to
something you said and I didn't quite
get it but I think it's important and of
course it's very interesting to our
audience. You were talking about the AI
financing and I think you said something
contingent makehole guarantees. I don't
um tell us your what is the history like
tell us about these financing as you see
them and what is the history how novel
are they relative to past financings or
how much is it that these are structures
that were very much in place for
something else are now being reproposed
into uh into this new into this new
exciting area.
>> Yeah. So I I'll start with with with
what's new um which is you know lending
um to support the growth in AI and
related infrastructure. Um there you're
talking about several trillion dollars
of investment need. So that's what's
new. Um, but you know what's uh not so
new is this idea that companies would
like to keep a good portion of their
debt off their balance sheet or come up
with structures that limit their overall
financial liability or give them some
flexibility to manage that liability
over time. uh and as an end investor,
you know, looking to lend to those
companies, you know, it's important to
acknowledge that lending against tech
firms, lending against AI
infrastructure, lending against AI
chips, uh is risky. That could be a real
good investment if you own the equity,
may not be a great investment if you own
the bonds, where most you get your
coupon and you hope to get par back at
the end of the day. So a lot of the
underwriting of these transactions uh
and there have been a lot and we expect
a lot more uh to come u over the course
of the next few years is to understand
the form of that guarantee and
understand the entity that's providing
that guarantee whether it's in the form
of lease payments or other type of
makehole type arrangements. And these
types of structures uh are what have
been around for many many years. you
know, back in the mid and late 1990s,
you know, a lot of times these were
would be done by Wall Street financial
institutions, sometimes across a segment
of their business where they would use a
corporate guarantee to arbitrage a bit
um the rating agency frameworks at other
times uh these deals were backed by you
know large u you know ships u equipment
uh other areas of the market. So it's it
it was the same type of analysis, the
same type of underwriting of checklist
which involves a lot of lawyers
>> uh to ensure that you understand the
guarantee what how you have to realize
on that guarantee and and and that's not
so different today.
>> Just to be clear, the guarantee we're
talking about here is okay here is a
hypothetical
SPV that owns a data center and it
borrows money and it finances it etc.
And the guaranteed question is how much
will the tenant of that data center
which didn't want to have all that debt
on their books maybe like a Facebook or
one of the hyperscalers how much are
they actually committed to being a s a
tenant for the long term there basically
that's what we're talking about
>> absolutely correct and and and why it it
matters here is you're typically talking
um about investment grade rated
counterparties on these transactions
where the infrastructure itself um the
the assets that are partially backing
the deal on a standalone basis would
achieve a very very low rating. So how
do you create a structure where you
improve the credit quality um while
meeting the needs of those that are
looking to borrow uh within this market?
So again the whole key is to make sure
that um something that the rating
agencies may assign uh investment grade
rating to is in fact investment grade
from a fundamental credit quality
perspective. And I I think that's
another theme. Um you know in talking
about private credit you know there are
more economically sensitive lower
quality loans. Uh and then there's been
a lot of growth on the investment grade
side. Uh it is very very dangerous to
assume something has an investment grade
rating just because the rating agencies
assign a rating to it. Uh it's
critically important that you do your
own credit work. Today all too
frequently you'll have u an investment
grade rating from one entity. And again,
market participants for years have
always joked if you can only find one
investment grade rating, it's pretty
fair to assume everyone else is below
investment grade. So, you know, the
bottom line is that there's been a lot
of aggressive uh underwriting going on
even with instruments that carry an
investment grade rating at least from
one entity. And again, when spreads are
tight, when documentation is relatively
weak, it's just critically important
that you do your own fundamental credit
work. I do think PIMCO has some
advantages in that area both in terms of
experience and resources, but it's super
important because you're not always
getting the terms that you want. When
you do, uh, you can unlock tremendous
value for your clients, but this is an
environment uh, uh, where you have to be
really really selective as a as a bond
investor at least.
>> Yeah. When I think back to um the 2015
environment, I remember a lot of people
were writing stories about the tripleB
bubble in investment grade. So triple B
is the lowest tier of investment grade
and that had been absolutely exploding
post financial crisis and everyone not
everyone a lot of people expected that
to end in tiers and instead it ended
with all those like triple B's getting
upgraded and a lot of junk getting
upgraded as well and having a bunch of
rising stars which I don't think a lot
of people were necessarily expecting but
talk a little bit more about the rating
agencies. What are the pressures that
you think are perhaps driving them to um
rate some of these structures higher
than they otherwise might be?
>> Well, again, there there are multiple
rating agencies that have different
philosophies um to to how they uh arrive
at a rating. Um and you know, there's
there's there's going to be, you know,
understandable disagreement, you know,
within markets, but issuers are quite
shrewd. You know, they're going to go to
where they get the most favorable uh
ratings treatment. Um this has always
been the case. And and I think the
important point you know to note is that
when stocks are going up 15% a year when
the economy is growing when you don't
have a sustained period of economic
weakness even poorly underwritten credit
will mature uh we experienced that in an
extreme sense you know during uh the
2000s what we try to do as active uh
investors is to underwrite to weaker
economic environments uh environments
where you know those underlying entities
or the infrastructure you know that that
you're lending against go into a period
of weakness and I think that's where you
know good fundamental credit work in
this type of environment that we're in
today that's very much driven by rating
arbitrage you know seeking out
investment grade ratings you know for an
insurance balance sheet or a reinsurance
balance sheet as an example you know can
lead at times to aggressive um decisions
so I think it's just the nature of the
fact that you have multiple agencies and
some will be more optimistic in certain
areas than than others But, you know,
that's great. You know, if if we didn't
have those sources of disagreement,
there wouldn't be opportunities to
generate uh incremental return, you
know, versus passive alternatives.
>> While we're here on credit, actually,
you know, I I there's probably about a
month ago or a month and a half ago,
that's when we were getting all those
headlines about tree color and that was
when Jamie Diamond made the sort of
famous crickets thing. I was getting
really
>> cockroaches. Cockroaches. Cockroaches.
>> I hate cockroaches and I like
[clears throat] crickets. So, I I want
to make that clear.
>> Crickets are lovely. You're right. I
should not um associate them with credit
blowups. That's completely unfair to
crickets. It's fair [laughter] to
cockroaches. Jamie Diamond made those
cockro I was getting worried. I saw all
these heads like, "Oh, another entity
took a hit on this. Another entity." I
was like, "Oh, this is very familiar. I
don't like I don't like how many times
the same company appears in the
headlines, but we haven't gotten that
much." Actually, since then, it's not
like there have been five more of those.
I'm just sort of curing is setting aside
some of the data center, the sexy
private credit stuff that everyone's
focused on. Do you do you think over the
last several year was there some
systematically bad underwriting going on
especially over the last few years or
was it could were there isolated
cockroaches the first cockroach before
they had a chance to lay eggs and make
babies
>> the lonely cockroaches.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So look again because there's been
so much growth in in in in lending uh to
to lower quality you know companies um
and again the last major cycle was
lending to lower quality um households
um you know there there there there's
going to be areas of of excess and I
think you know people are are focused on
these areas um but but again when you
look at you know the the cumulative you
know delinquencies and in losses. Yes,
uh they've they've increased a bit over
the last few years. Uh but these
situations have been relatively uh
isolated, but again, anytime you've had
this much credit expansion,
um you're going to have challenges and
these challenges are happening in a
relatively strong economy. So, we don't
think this will be a catastrophe. Uh the
word I've used is that there's likely
going to be disappointment in certain
areas of the credit markets that have
performed exceptionally well over the
last 10 to 15 years. But that it
shouldn't be viewed as an overly
controversial statement. That's how
markets work. You know, credit was very
cheap 10 or 15 years ago. Uh highquality
bonds were very very expensive. Today,
credit spreads are near all-time tights.
Equities are near all-time highs. And
value at high quality bonds looks
reasonable relative to their history.
So, you know, starting valuations tend
to be pretty big drivers of future
returns. If the economy continues to
grow, if stocks keep going up 15% a
year, yes, these will be, you know,
relatively isolated situations. But if
you get into a period of economic
weakness, losses will go up and there'll
likely be some disappointment. I I I
think that's the best way to categorize
it. And then I think the second
important point when you look at markets
in a longer term historical context is
that regulators hate bailing out the
same sectors twice. Um, back during the
GFC it was lending to the consumer. It
was excessive lending from the banks
that caused all of the problems. Almost
took down the financial system. And not
surprisingly, the regulations towards
the banks and towards consumer lending
was massive. Um, and today when you look
at the world, um, the household balance
sheet, certainly middle income and in
and above cohort groups, uh, hasn't been
stronger this strong in several decades.
uh there's record amounts of borrower
equity in these areas of the market have
been very very strong um from an
underwriting perspective. the areas that
escaped the scrutiny the last time, you
know, a lot of lending to non-financial
corporates, a lot of, you know, this
this this mid-market private lending
that came out of that period relatively
unscathed from a regulatory perspective
has grown a lot. So, I think a lot of
this just relates to longer term cycles.
Uh, PIPCO was talking in a much
different way back in 2005 and 2006
where we were screaming from the rooftop
saying that, you know, what was going on
was so irrational that there were major
problems ahead. That's not where we are.
Um, and that that's why I I I I I I
sometimes sound a bit more negative than
we are. I think that the idea of
disappointment uh is the way people
should think about some of these areas
of the credit markets. And the good news
is you don't have to accept
disappointment. um you can you know
simply accept the fact that you had a
great performance run and that by going
up in quality expanding into a global
opportunity set um that hasn't been
sufficiently embraced just yet perhaps
owning a little bit of non you know
dollar exposure get you the same place
with much more resiliency much more
downside protection and a lot more
liquidity or flexibility to change your
mind in the in in in in the future as
well. Hm. Since you brought up household
balance sheets, can you talk to us a
little bit about your housing outlook
because I believe PIMCO has been pretty
bullish on mortgages recently, but at
the same time, we've seen a slight
slowdown in the housing market. Um, but
then again, we still have long-term
structural um tailwinds such as a
massive under supply of homes in the US.
Where do you see that going in the
coming years? particularly, you know, if
we were to see inflationary pressures
start to pick up and those longer end
yields start to rise.
>> Yeah. So, we're we are uh very bullish
on housing related investments uh in the
United States as well as u you know in
in other areas around the world. Um
agency guaranteed mortgages uh still
trade at very widespreads uh relative to
corporates uh even in an absolute sense.
We think it's a very high quality liquid
area of the market that again makes a
lot of sense uh to own across a variety
of of different mandates. We also like
lending um in the non-g guaranteed area
against the house simply because
borrowers have record amounts of equity.
So
>> just loves collateral. That's what it
sounds like. You love collateral.
>> Yeah, we like good documentation and and
and and good good good [clears throat]
collateral, you know, at least uh all
else equal. But, you know, it's not a
major bet on the directionality of
homes. When you're lending against um a
household that has 70 percentage points
of of borrower equity, your home can go
down quite a bit and you're very well
protected. That same dynamic exists, you
know, over in the UK, across Europe, you
know, in even in other parts of the
world. So, you know, again, regulators
don't like bailing out the same sectors
twice. That's pretty good asset
allocation advice. It's quite
straightforward but also you know you
you have much better fundamentals across
households. But to your specific
question around housing you know it's a
tough situation. We do think that homes
are going to remain elevated from a
valuation perspective and affordability
is going to remain quite constrained
because there's no easy answer. You know
you bring the mortgage rate down the
home price goes up. You know
affordability doesn't change in a
meaningful sense. what we really need uh
in this country and other parts of the
world are more homes uh more housing
units and again because of a lot of the
you know post global financial crisis
regulation it's been real hard to build
new homes. So our base case view is that
home prices are going to moderate here.
On a national level, you could see at
least in real terms, you know, some
steady uh declines over the course of
the next several years in certain
markets uh that are a bit overextended,
you know, a bit more volatility. But we
do think that you know home prices are
going to remain elevated uh from a
historical perspective just because of
the fact that people have locked in very
very low mortgage rates um 30 years you
know not just five or 10 years you know
which which were you know mortgage
durations you know popular preGFC so you
know you're not going to see you know
too much turnover um and unfortunately
that means that um homes for you know a
lot of younger Americans are going to
remain um out of reach um but but again
um maybe some incremental benefit, maybe
you know this administration get
mortgage rates down a bit um through
some creative policy the next couple of
years by the way would like that given
PIMCO's current positioning. Um but
again but again without without building
new homes which are going to take you
know many many years um you know it
there's no easy solution.
>> Um I want to go back you mentioned this
idea there's there's an optimal amount
of fiscal profleacy from the perspective
of the bond investor. Maybe you want
them to push it a little bit because
then you get paid a little bit for
taking it on. But obviously you don't
want them to push so forth where you get
some fiscal dominance spiral leading to
higher and higher inflation. You want to
find that sweet spot. You know, I
mentioned we we were talking a little
bit about politics earlier about whether
a independent central bank can be
sustained. But when you look abroad, you
know, it seems like in a lot of pretty
major we're not the only country that's
having political volatility these days.
People are concerned about um the
approach that the new Japanese PM is
going to take. And so we know that rates
are higher in Japan. France very
indebted country. They seem to have like
a new government every two week. I like
lose track of all the times their
government collapses and so forth. The
UK very indebted country. Um the moment
anyone takes office, their approval
ratings plunge to negative 30 or
whatever. There's a lot going on on the
political front and that sort of
determines whether countries are even
it's even possible to run um what might
be more responsible fiscal policies. Is
that something that I don't know keeps
you up at night is the right term but is
that something that's a big part of your
work is trying to understand especially
when you think abroad understand the
political dynamics in all these
countries that are happening right now.
>> Yeah, absolutely. And um you know we we
we get together you know once a year you
know to talk about the outlook for
economies and markets over a you know
fiveyear type time frame. And you know
one of our adviserss I think put it well
was that you know we used to live in a
world where you know economic outcomes
would drive politics. Uh if economies
were strong you know politicians usually
ended up in a in a good situation they'
they they'd stay in in office. Today it
feels like it it's a bit reversed where
political priorities um geopolitical
tensions
um are are are are driving economics and
I think you see that to a degree with
tariff policy you see it you know to a
degree with with various forms of of of
reassuring you see it in terms of these
populist tendencies across markets so
they're all very very uh important and a
lot more important um than they were in
the past and I think it takes a lot of
humility from someone like myself um and
others that grew up you doing you know
discounted cash flow analysis and you
know derivative pricing uh as opposed to
understanding the political economy. So,
you know, we think that that's important
both from the perspective of gaining an
edge in markets, but also understanding
that um sometimes we'll be wrong. And
when you're running the debt levels um
that countries are running or your
deficits in in in overall debt levels,
uh there's going to be some
unpredictability. And that's why this
idea of uh looking to exploit a global
opportunity set, prudent
diversification,
targeting some countries outside the US
that aren't running, you know, six 7%
deficits. And there are high-quality
countries out there, Australia being an
example. Uh Germany being another
example, even the United Kingdom,
although they have a lot less uh policy
flexibility than we do, given that
they're a smaller, you know, open
economy with their own currency, offer
attractive yields. So this is less about
picking your favorite country. Um, from
our perspective, it's more looking to
take advantage of attractive
opportunities around the globe with some
tilt towards those countries that are
balancing their budget and that do have
a better overall fiscal picture. And we
haven't talked about emerging markets,
but there, you know, a few emerging
markets that, you know, this cycle got
ahead of inflation um that have been um
in some sense more fiscally prudent than
their developed market counterparties
and that have very very high yields uh
even adjusted for inflation rates. So
even some diversification in some of the
higher quality areas of the emerging
markets, you know, from our perspective
represents real good value or or real
good sources of uh diversification and
return versus um some of these assets,
you know, here in the United States that
have performed real well uh
historically, but where when you look
at, you know, the likelihood for forward
uh performance um just just look a
little bit less interesting.
Actually, this reminds me thinking back
to 2015. 2015 was actually a big year
for PIMCO because it was your first full
year without Bill Gross, right? Who left
in late 2014?
>> Oh, yeah, that's right.
>> Um, can you talk to us perhaps how how
the culture of PIMCO has changed over
the past 10 years and how you would
describe that evolution because I
imagine it's been a long time. It must
have shifted a little bit. Yeah, look at
we, you know, the way Bill left the firm
wasn't ideal to say the least. Um, but,
you know, Bill left us in, you know, an
incredibly strong position. Uh, you
know, he created a lot of the frameworks
that we still use today to make
decisions. You know, Bill was a strong
personality, but he believed in
teamwork, uh, and believed that
investing was, uh, a team sport, you
know, so to speak. So from that
perspective uh there didn't need to be a
lot of change or or certainly not
radical change but you know over the
this period you know markets have become
you know so much more specialized uh
client needs um have evolved you know
over time uh the introduction of a more
sizable private opportunity set um has
been important uh technology big data um
using you know trading techniques
portfolio trading and in and other
automated you know, type, you know,
trading strategies are all critically
important. So, you know, we're a much
more specialized firm today, which is a
function of, again, you know, evolving
client needs, but also just, you know,
the realities of of this world uh that
we live in today where data is abundant,
uh much less expensive to access. So,
from that perspective, we've needed to
adapt. Uh we've become, you know, even
more global. So, you know, we tend to,
you know, um utilize regional committees
and in in regional um decision-m
structures, but you know, a lot stayed
the same um at least in terms of
mindset. And we try to really leverage,
you know, the history and the experience
the firm has had managing and navigating
through more challenging markets. 22 was
rough um you know for both stocks and
bonds but you know in general um you
know the environment's been reasonably
forgiving but you can always get into
these you know you know tougher periods
and and again um we try to use these
structures that you know Bill put in
place and and and Bill deserves uh a
tremendous amount of credit for. It's
funny in your last answer there, there
were like five things you said that
could merit full follow-ups or even full
follow-up episodes like about changing
client needs over time or what happens
when the cost of data goes from costly
to uh fairly affordable etc. All those
sort of interesting things. But just the
my last question and it sort of relates
to technology you know when it comes to
AI in investing um we've talked a little
bit more on the short-term like high
frequency side and the sort of models
that they use and the signals that they
use and uh how that sort of relates to
AI and their application. But for an for
a firm like PIMCO and when you're
thinking about longer term holding
periods and uh you know you want to have
some a good collateral and good
documentation etc. Currently today have
you found ways to apply cutting edge AI
technology to the the this process of
good security selection?
>> We have um and we're finding ways to
utilize the technology at at an
accelerating rate. Um, you know, we do
some of this in some of our, you know,
more quant focused strategies, you know,
where we look to use AI to actually
drive alpha, but just AI as a tool to
drive efficiency uh has been will be um
critically important uh to uh managing
uh an investment platform. Just the ease
in which you can access data um that you
can use AI to help support overall
analysis. um both at the you know
company level, the individual investment
level, but even you know combing through
economic history and understanding some
of these geopolitical trends and themes
that are hard you know at least
intuitively to grasp u are going to be
critically important. Uh in fact before
um our discussion today spent um you
know considerable time you know with our
head of technology and um our head of uh
implementation talking about various
firmwide initiatives and I the only
other point is you know my own use of AI
both at home and at the office has gone
up almost exponentially over the last
year or two and I'm the last person you
want to you know rely on to understand
this technology. It's the younger folks
that we hired over the last year that
are helping us with a lot of this um
perspective. So this is uh going to be
quite disruptive um probably
productivity enhancing you know at the
at the you know economywide level but
it's also going to lead to considerable
disruption and it's important that um we
don't get disrupted and that we use this
technology to drive client returns but
you know it's going to be important uh
in in so many ways uh and we're really
really embracing it here uh here at
PIMCO. Dan Iverson, thank you so much
for coming on OddLogs. That was a
fantastic conversation. Really
appreciate you taking the time.
>> Thank you guys.
>> Tracy, I thought that was great. I
really I really enjoyed talking to Dan.
Fantastic overview.
>> Yeah. So, a couple things uh stood out
to me. So, number one, the idea of no
more free lunch in credit. Um although
people have been talking about that for
a while now, and obviously with the rate
environment changing, you you can see
that argument. The other thing that I
really liked was um his description of
policy makers don't want to bail out the
same thing twice.
>> Yeah, that's an interesting framework or
way to think about it.
>> Yeah, absolutely. And it kind of
reminded me of um there's another person
in credit who um used to tell me um a
line about how he invests, which is
follow the bad guys, right? So like the
guys that blew up in one part of the
market usually,
>> you know, start doing something, they're
gonna act get their act Wait, are you
saying they're going to get their act
together or they're going to do
something?
>> No, I'm saying they move to the new
thing and then that blows up. And so if
you can just identify the bad guys and
just follow their career trajectories,
just short everything the bad guys do.
>> I love that. I love that take. Um, you
know, it was really I had not realized
that stat he said about how little you
got paid for taking for buying poor
credits up until the GFC. Yeah.
>> And then postGFC is just totally flipped
that you just got you should just go as
far out on the credit risk curve as you
possibly can and you've just walloped uh
anything safe. And I knew that I guess
on some level but the extreme of that
statistical divergence but you know you
have to think we had that well it was
more than a hiccup in 2020 but we did
bounce back very fast from it. So really
what we are looking at is you know well
over 15 years now of the lines just
going up and you have to think about
what are the things that accumulate over
that time or the patterns that
accumulate or the habits etc. and this
idea that there's a lot of safety at the
far end of the risk curve and that
people don't care and that maybe now
some of the the perception that there's
safety at the far end of the risk curve
and how much that's been uh burnished
into people is very interesting.
>> Absolutely. The other thing he said that
I thought was very poignant was the idea
of you have all these private credit
firms starting up, right, and promising
these astonishing returns for investors.
and he made the point that like
>> you can't just say you're going to make
all this money in private credit because
like those deals might not be out there
and available to you. You have to do it
on a risk or value adjusted basis. And
as as I say that I see um a headline in
Bloomberg about Capital Group getting
into private credit as well. So So this
is the thing like it's a booming market.
There are a lot of competitive pressures
both on the lender side and also on the
credit rating side and you can see
people really scrambling to get into the
market and accumulate as much as they
can and so the temptation of course is
to you know accept lower terms accept
lower quality.
>> Totally.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Wisthal. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Dash Bennett
at D-Bot and Kalebrooks at Kaleb Brooks.
>> And if you want more OddLthoughts
content, you should check out our daily
newsletter that is at
bloomber.com/odotss.
>> And you can join fellow listeners in
conversation 247 in our discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation, if
you are liking all these anniversary
episodes, then please uh like the video
or leave a comment or better yet
subscribe. Thanks for watching. [music]